Previously on Reign...
NARCISSE: Have you any news
from your daughter,
the queen of Spain?
She wants Henri
on the throne,
not his older brother.
Leeza will allow Charles
to remain king
while Henri's delayed.
I feared that Mary's wedding
would empower other nations.
She could invade!
If she does,
she will not find you alone.
I am here, Elizabeth,
and I will not forsake you.
CATHERINE: Since Nicole
has her hands on Charles,
we'd best control her.
You can do that.
I'm not sure
bedding the lover
of the king is a wise idea.
I can't help wishing that,
at the right time,
I'd met someone like you.
KNOX: Lord Moray and Mary
have developed
an uncanny,
nearly preternatural ability
to undermine me.
So I had her home watched.
You betrayed me, Emily.
James drew you in with lies
and used you.
As much as I might want to,
I can't call off
this wedding
to Darnley, because...
I'm pregnant with his child.
(exciting orchestral music
playing)
♪ ♪
(music ends)
Only a suggestion,
but perhaps some
additional percussion
throughout,
its strong beat
a representation
of the king's own
mighty heart.
Aha.
More percussion throughout.
Mary!
I'm glad you've come.
So, what do you think?
Well, you commissioned it
for your coronation.
It need only please your ear.
I need to borrow
my private secretary.
You may have him back
when we're finished.
David has been indispensable
in planning my coronation.
Thank you for allowing him
to assist me.
Of course.
Mary...
um, it has been nearly a
month since our wedding.
Might you at last allow me to
visit your chambers tonight?
You do still
desire an heir?
I've been traveling, Darnley...
And a show of face to the
people is always advised,
but you have also
been avoiding me.
Mary, we are wed...
Which is why you need to plan
your coronation.
I don't have time
to discuss this. David?
Come with me.
Play it again.
♪ ♪
I've invited Lord
Hamilton to court
in the hopes that he will stay
for Lord Darnley's coronation.
As a powerful Protestant,
his family's support is vital
if I wish to take
the English throne.
What may I do to help?
Well, there are issues
that divide us.
In addition to having a very
strong claim to my throne,
Lord Hamilton sent a...
a marriage request...
before I chose Darnley.
Ah.
Jealousy.
It goes beyond that.
A blood feud
has long existed
between the Hamiltons
and Lord Darnley's family.
If I wish to gain
Lord Hamilton's support,
it's best accomplished
without Darnley.
I've arranged
a full itinerary
for Lord Hamilton and his guests
when they arrive.
I need you
to keep Darnley occupied
with... planning
for his coronation,
so that their paths never cross.
I'll involve Darnley
in every detail,
no matter how small,
so that you may focus on the
larger issue of politics.
Thank you. I'll let Darnley know
when the time is right.
Good news. Lord Hamilton has
accepted your invitation.
If the Protestants of
Clan Hamilton agree
to stand with you,
it will prove to the world
that you are a tolerant queen.
And Knox would be
greatly weakened.
Lord Hamilton
is sure to tell
his Protestant ally
about our meeting.
Is it possible the Reverend Knox
will just sit back
and do nothing?
You must see Emily.
If her husband
has plans
to interfere
with our negotiations,
she may know something
about them.
You know, Darnley won't be happy
when he learns
that you've met with
the Hamiltons behind his back.
My concern is for Scotland,
not for Darnley's
bruised feelings.
And if his feelings
interfere with your legacy,
you do need to produce an heir.
Actually, James...
I am already pregnant.
So soon?
(laughs)
Mary, that's
wonderful!
No one can know.
Not even Darnley.
Not yet.
Of course.
You will be an amazing mother.
Thank you, James.
I don't know what I'd do
without you.
Am I interrupting?
Hello, James.
Hello, Greer.
Uh...
I'll leave you two.
I think I've made
a horrible mistake.
At your wedding,
I told James
how much I desired to have
a man like him in my life.
I had hoped it
would encourage him
to express his
own feelings,
if he had any for me.
Instead, he now treats me
with the same affection
he shows the furniture.
He's respecting
your circumstances.
You are still married, Greer.
So is Emily Knox.
You shouldn't take it
personally.
Things aren't always
as they seem.
ELIZABETH:
Isn't it wonderful?
There's something
about a bathhouse that is
so incredibly... sensual.
(sighs): Yes. If one enjoys
the dampness of sweat.
Poor Jane.
You're overheating
because you're
not dressed properly.
You may go.
And see to it
that I'm not disturbed.
♪ Harder when it's cold ♪
♪ Even when I'm playing ♪
♪ In the fire ♪
♪ Even when I'm doing it ♪
♪ For all my life ♪
♪ Harder than imagined ♪
♪ Harder when I let it go ♪
♪ Tell me that love is enough ♪
♪ The seas will be parted
for us ♪
(water splashing)
Were you seen?
GIDEON:
I was not.
♪ Ooh, ooh ♪
♪ ♪
♪ In another lifetime ♪
♪ I would never
change my mind... ♪
Would you like to hear
what's being planned
for your birthday
celebration this evening?
Is it you and me in bed...
with you feeding me cake?
Mm, close.
A gala in your honor.
Hundreds of nobles
and dignitaries.
It's the perfect opportunity
for you to peruse a number
of potential suitors.
These suitors,
are they Catholic?
The majority.
With Mary now
wed to Darnley,
your only hope of gaining
the support of Catholic nations
is with a Catholic union
of your own.
Good. I will
need your help
if I am to choose wisely.
Of course.
I have a...
thorough understanding
of your politics,
but also your...
personal tastes.
Good. I will need
to find a husband
who I can not only tolerate,
but who will not plot
to have my head removed.
Agreed. Your neck must be
protected at all costs.
You do understand that
our current relationship
is only temporary.
Once a match is made,
we will need to stop this.
There's no confusion.
I'm your advisor first,
your lover second.
And right now...
I'm done giving advice.
♪ I'd do it all again ♪
♪ A thousand times... ♪
(women laughing)
I want to thank you.
You've done wonders
with Charles.
He no longer suffers
night terrors,
his confidence grows daily.
CATHERINE: Stephan.
I've been looking for you.
(bell tolling in distance)
Mm, I see you have Nicole
well in hand.
Mm.
I'm turning her
into a proper lady.
She wants to be
a courtesan.
In return, she is
guiding Charles for us,
keeping him in line.
Well, if only
that were enough for Leeza,
queen of Spain
and of meddling
in French politics.
She still wants Charles
off the throne.
She believes that Henri is
the man to keep France Catholic.
The Protestants have been
troublesome of late.
A firm hand is needed.
Well, a firm hand
will be needed
to keep my sons
from each other's throats.
And after agreeing
to let me handle matters,
Leeza went behind my back and
she wrote to Henri directly.
And he is on his way here now,
fresh from his latest defeat
of the Turks,
aware that Spain wants him
on the throne.
Toppling the Turks.
You know, I have to say,
he does sound impressive.
He's ambitious.
And Charles,
he's no match for
his younger brother.
Nicole must get him
to willingly abdicate
and disappear
from the world's stage.
And once he does, we must pray
that the people accept it,
and leave him in peace,
because I cannot survive
the loss
of another son.
NICOLE:
It's gorgeous.
There is another
reason for my visit.
Hmm.
An important task for you,
regarding Charles.
It won't be easy, but
you will be well rewarded.
A country chateau of which
you will have full control--
kitchen, staff,
decor.
Go on.
It would be your new home.
Once Charles agrees
to abdicate.
How is that even possible?
Unless Charles leaves court.
Well, he would leave court.
Well, he'd have to go far away,
to remove himself completely
from the public eye.
You really have learned so much.
That's what the chateau is for.
Mm.
He would still be a Valois,
a noble of high rank.
(exhales shakily)
And as for you,
well, you would have
your every need fulfilled.
It's more than you could
possibly have dreamed of.
I dreamt that I'd be
the first of my family
to escape that dreary farm.
That I'd meet
someone like you,
who would initiate me
to the excitement
and intrigue of court.
I don't want to
go off into hiding
with some weak, fallen king.
I want to be in
the thick of things.
With you.
With me?
I've fallen for you.
I love you.
I need you
to save a king's life.
You must convince
Charles to abdicate.
Which means going away with him.
You don't care about me at all.
I could. I might.
But we have an arrangement.
Which is now utterly
and completely over.
Nicole...
You hurt me.
I'm done helping you,
and the monarchy,
and France.
It is your country, too.
I don't
care.
♪ ♪
(applause)
(chuckles)
♪ You're on my mind ♪
♪ And all you ever do is spin ♪
♪ In circles around my head... ♪
Lord Mortimer, I will have
no excuse now for being late.
But I thank you.
It's lovely.
Your Majesty, it's time
for you to dance.
♪ Every time
I've ever chased it ♪
Impressive turnout:
32 suitors from
16 countries.
Mm.
♪ Hey, little girl
with the crooked smile ♪
Congratulations, Your Grace.
I will do my best
to screen out anyone
who holds opinions
strongly opposing your own.
And if anyone shows promise,
I'll take them
for a stroll
in the garden,
so I can speak to them
more privately.
Your Majesty,
may I introduce
Count Alfred Von Buren
of Vienna.
♪ I needed something to say ♪
(chuckles)
Huh.
♪ ♪
♪ I will follow you ♪
♪ To the end of the world ♪
♪ With you ♪
♪ I will follow you ♪
♪ To the end of the world ♪
♪ With you ♪
♪ Jump off the edge ♪
♪ Whoa... ♪
♪ Hey ♪
♪ Jump off the edge ♪
♪ Whoa... ♪
♪ I will ♪
MAN:
My father
always advised me: find a woman
who can cook and clean
and a woman
that's fantastic in bed.
Then pray the two never meet.
(laughter)
♪ Whoa... ♪
♪ Hey ♪
♪ Jump off the edge ♪
Oh, your third
wife was barren?
How very sad for you.
She appeared perfectly normal
when we first met,
only to find out later
she was defective.
Such a disappointment.
What use is a woman
if she cannot reproduce?
♪ ♪
(indistinct chatter)
Jane, have you
seen Her Majesty?
I believe she went
for a stroll in the garden
with the archduke
of Austria. Very handsome.
The queen seemed
quite pleased with him.
(indistinct chatter, laughter)
Did you really
say that to him?
Is that funny to you?
(laughs)
(chuckles)
MARY:
Lord Hamilton,
I'm pleased
you're here.
And what
of your Catholic husband,
the king consort?
Where is he?
His absence suggests he does
not share in your... pleasure.
Lord Darnley is busy with
matters regarding the Crown.
But we are
of one mind:
to move forward, one nation,
Catholics and Protestants
united.
Then perhaps
you should have married me
instead of a Catholic.
Imagine it:
you, Catholic,
me, Protestant, both with a
claim to the Scottish throne.
There is the unity you speak of.
But I'm looking beyond Scotland,
to England.
And you can help me.
If you stand with me
at Lord Darnley's coronation,
it will show both faiths
that we share a common goal.
You're asking me to turn my back
on my family,
ignore a hundred years
of animosity
that exists
between Lord Darnley's family
and mine.
What's in it for me?
I am willing to restore
the Hamilton family's seat
on the privy council.
You would do this?
Allow me to influence policy,
knowing my hatred
for Lord Darnley?
I am interested in the future,
not the past.
It is a generous offer,
and one that I encourage you
to accept.
I will consider it.
James?
May I speak with you?
I'm just heading out.
Can it wait until...
No. It will only take a moment.
At Mary's wedding,
there were things said,
by me,
that I'm afraid have made you
uncomfortable around me.
I'm sorry, Greer. If I've
treated you differently, it's--
it's only because I've been
preoccupied with my duties.
And preoccupied with Emily Knox.
Do you care for her, James?
I only press the issue
because Mary said
things aren't always
as they seem.
And I realize...
...love doesn't need to be
a thing of the past for me.
Not if I am clear
about what I want.
Who I want.
Greer, my life is...
complicated.
I hope it will
not always be,
but for now, it is.
I'm sorry.
Be patient with me.
Please.
PRIEST:
I baptize thee
in the name of the Father,
and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit.
(loud banging)
(gasping)
(gasping grows louder)
(men yelling)
(grunting)
(gasping)
See that this message
reaches King Charles,
or this church
will become your child's grave.
Now run!
CATHERINE:
If Charles doesn't release
the Protestant prisoners
listed here,
they'll start killing
the Catholic hostages,
one by one.
Please, do as they ask.
My entire family
is in that church,
my baby boy.
We will speak with the king.
And he will respond.
This is worse than I feared.
The gall.
We need to crush them.
Charles has balked at this sort
of military action in the past,
especially against Protestants.
Well, Henri would have
no such hesitation.
But as Charles is king,
only he can authorize
a military strike.
Has Nicole spoken with him
about abdicating?
(sighs)
No.
You said
you had her in hand.
That was before she decided
she was in love with me.
(sighs)
I tried to hedge
my response, but...
But now what? Hmm?
She's brokenhearted and angry.
(sighs)
Well, the answer is simple.
You must seduce her,
convince her that
you could love her.
You're very good at that.
(sighs)
Or you used to be.
What is holding you back?
Charles needs guidance.
You know that he will
want to give in
to the Protestants' demands.
If we appear weak,
we are one step closer
to civil war.
(church bell tolls)
Another hour passes.
It is time to
show your king
that our threats
are to be taken seriously.
(church bell tolls)
(grunting)
(woman screaming)
(scattered yelling)
How could you
invite the Hamiltons here
knowing our history?
I explained my reasons.
After it is done.
After they are comfortably
within the walls of our home.
(slaps table)
The very people
who murdered my grandfather!
I have heard enough about the
bad blood between your families.
This feud will never
end, unless somebody
is willing to be the better man.
I am asking you to be that man.
Then you are asking
to be disappointed.
We need their Protestant
support.
It is support that
they are unlikely to give.
I think they will.
I have offered Lord Hamilton
a seat on the privy council.
A seat on the privy council?
Why don't you just hand him
your throne, as well?
The same ambition
that drove the Hamiltons
to take my grandfather's life
could drive them to take yours.
And since you refused me
the Crown Matrimonial,
they will stake
their own claim to rule.
You are determined to paint them
as murderers.
And you
should have discussed this
with me!
I'm your husband, I'm your king!
Not just some figurehead!
What am I saying?
Of course,
that's all I am to you.
I didn't want it to be
like this.
I had hoped
that our marriage
would be a partnership
in every way.
But with your drinking,
your cheating,
your blind ambition...
I am trying to be better!
Then try harder.
I mean it, Darnley.
If the Hamiltons stay
for your coronation,
you cannot let them provoke you
to anger or violence.
A better partner,
a better king
knows that sometimes,
we must do things we hate
for the sake of the Crown.
(scoffs)
(door opens)
(sighs)
(door closes)
GIDEON:
The archduke of Austria
seemed like a nice fellow.
He's a little bit
fancy for my taste.
Well, he was very handsome.
With a long, powerful stride.
I was practically breathless
trying to keep up with him.
Stride is what one looks for
in a horse,
not a husband.
I prefer to match my pace
to my partner's.
I may take things
more slowly, but...
you will still
find yourself
breathless.
Oh, wait.
I forgot to bring the...
Oh, it doesn't matter.
You are a queen
looking to make a strategic
marriage alliance.
You can't very well do that
when you're pregnant
with another man's child.
If I can get pregnant at all.
Once I am wed,
I will be expected
to produce an heir
and blamed if I do not.
Getting pregnant
before I'm married
might not be
the worst idea.
If I am barren,
there's no reason to give up
half my throne.
If you do get pregnant...
I could be married
within a week.
With my child.
No one will know.
What, and that makes it better?
I'm just your stud horse,
testing your fertility?
I'm sorry,
I just thought that...
I know this is
meant to be
a relationship of convenience
and nothing more, but...
...what we share has--
has quite unexpectedly
become very personal to me.
I appreciate that's
not what you need
right now. Or want.
I'm sorry for that.
(door opens)
NICOLE:
Are you here to lavish me
with more gifts
and then send me away to rot?
You are the only one at court
who has the king's heart.
That makes you
very special.
Charles needs you now.
There is a very delicate
situation at Vendome.
Protestants have
taken hostages.
I thought I made it clear.
Our arrangement is off.
I won't do anything for a
man who only seeks to use me.
Nicole...
I need to apologize.
You have come
to mean something to me.
You're just saying that now
to get what you want.
It's what I want that pains me.
I had a wife
who was killed.
Lola.
Yes.
Of course.
Why didn't I realize?
Because you're young
and still so innocent.
Being with you
feels like a betrayal...
Because you love me, too?
I don't want to.
The truth is that...
I cannot erase you from my mind.
(Nicole moans)
CHARLES:
I have deemed
that immediate
military action is required
to quash the Protestant
insurgents in Vendome,
and save innocent lives.
France will not tolerate
such blatant and aggressive
defiance of the Crown
and its laws.
MAN:
Very wise,
Your Majesty.
Excellent.
Well done, Nicole.
She's good in bed,
and she can turn on
the tears as well
as the praise.
And well done you.
I was starting to think
you didn't have it in you.
Oh, I played her masterfully.
Hmm.
And all it cost me
was the desecration
of Lola's memory.
But that doesn't mean
anything to you, does it?
(horse whinnying,
dog barking)
JAMES:
Emily, tell me what's happened.
My husband knows about us.
(sighs)
And I know
you were only using me.
And I hate you.
More than I thought possible.
But I need you.
My husband says
he forgives me,
but he treats me worse
than a common whore.
I am forced to sleep and eat
with the animals.
And I am beat
with the same rod.
Emily, I'm sorry.
Tell me how I can help.
You took my life from me,
and now you will
find me another.
Away from my husband,
away from you,
away from anyone
who knows my shame.
Emily, that's-that's not
something I can do.
Because you fear
my husband, too.
But you know people in France.
Get me there. I have information
that will make it
worth whatever retribution
you face from him.
Something horrible is going
to happen to Mary.
Tell me what it is,
and I will get you away
from here, I promise.
Tomorrow,
before the coronation,
Lord Hamilton has plotted
with my husband to kill Mary.
(knocking on door)
You must be Lord Darnley.
We have not met, Lord Hamilton.
What gave me away?
You have the look
of an Englishman.
And the face of a traitor.
I wish to apologize
for not greeting you earlier.
I also wish to make it
up to you personally
by inviting you to stay
for my coronation.
Oh, my, aren't you a good lad,
doing your wife's bidding.
I can't help but think
how different things would be
if the queen had married me.
She'd be pregnant by now,
that's for certain.
We are working on it.
Working?
If Mary were in my bed,
I assure you
she would not consider it work.
Anyway, no need
to feel pressure.
If you fail to produce an heir,
well, my family,
as next in line, is more
than ready to step in.
Lord Hamilton,
might we not set aside
our differences?
Think of what could accomplish
if we supported our queen
and country together.
Hmm. Perhaps.
How long can we really resent
one another for the tension
that existed between
our grandfathers, anyway?
In truth,
it was more than tension.
Your family murdered
my grandfather.
Your grandfather was a traitor.
And your grandfather
was a bastard.
By birth.
Who persecuted Protestants,
and then became one.
A Catholic who becomes
a Protestant
still serves the same God.
A Scot who becomes an Englishman
loses his soul.
Like your father.
I've taken up
enough of your time.
I do hope
that you will accept
Mary's offer
of a seat on the privy council.
If I do,
it will be to block
your every move.
I'll turn the privy council
against you
and render you powerless,
so everyone can see
what a weak and impotent man
you truly are.
And I'll laugh.
Like my grandfather
must've laughed
when he slit
your grandfather's throat.
(inhales sharply)
A gift from the future
king of Scotland to one
of his loyal subjects.
You've probably poisoned it.
Prince Erik, too powerful.
Duke of Savoy, too powerless.
Count Alejandro, too dull;
Alfonso D'Este, too... lumpy?
Elizabeth, these are all
viable marriage candidates.
You need to take
this seriously.
Uh...
Gideon, about last night...
Oh, I apologize for my outburst.
But I do believe
it is best that we
return to things
as they once were--
you, my Queen and I,
your advisor.
Nothing more.
Um, what about the
archduke of Austria?
You said you liked his...
stride.
I don't want the archduke.
He's a Catholic,
a good fit both politically,
strategically...
I don't want any of them.
Then who do you want?
You.
What I want,
and what I need,
is you.
Since last night,
I have done little
but think about
what my life would be like
if we were not together.
A life where I would
see you every day
and know that I would
not feel your touch at night.
A life where I
would be unloved
and unknown as only you love
and know me.
And it is not a life I desire.
This is personal for me,
as well.
No explosions from Darnley.
I know I have you
to thank for that.
Well, except for a moment
when he asked me
to check on alterations
being made to the crown,
I was with him all day.
If it all goes according
to plan,
by this time tomorrow,
Darnley will have his crown,
and the Hamiltons will have
their seat on the privy council.
Here's to you taking
Elizabeth's throne.
(door opens)
Mary,
you must come with me, quickly.
There's a plot
against your life.
Knox incited the
Hamiltons to stage a coup.
I've sent guards
to arrest the Hamiltons,
but they're not
in their chambers.
Until they're located,
we must leave the castle.
Now.
Greer, you come with me.
David, find Darnley.
He needs to be taken
to safety as well.
(Hamilton laughs)
Stay back.
Halt.
Stand where you are
and surrender your weapons.
What have we done?
Are we not allowed to leave if
we desire female companionship?
I will ask one more time.
Remove your weapons
and lay them on the floor.
You are under arrest
for treason
and conspiracy to assassinate
the queen.
(grunts)
(men grunting)
(man cries out)
(grunting continues)
(whimpering)
(Hamilton coughs)
So...
Knox was right.
You meant to kill us
all along.
Is that what he told you?
Is that
why you wouldn't disarm?
He said it was a trap.
I didn't believe him.
MARY:
My God, no.
We can't let him die.
He's the only one
that can prove Knox has been
feeding us all lies.
Greer, fetch the physician.
(panting):
No.
Mary, he won't make it.
Emily told me once
she was a terrible liar.
She's quite good, actually.
I believed her.
You will never know
Emily's motives.
Knox may have given her
no choice.
May have threatened her
very life if she refused
to feed you false information
about the Hamiltons.
And now, because we were unable
to save Lord Hamilton,
Knox is free to say that
you lured them to the castle,
powerful Protestants
to the slaughter.
He'll preach of your treachery.
I will lose all hope
of Protestant support.
Unless someone else
takes the blame.
James, no.
It is because of me that
you're in this trouble, Mary.
You must hold me accountable.
But it's because of me
that you slept with Emily
in the first place.
Mary,
to take England,
to hold Scotland,
you must say that
I acted on my own.
You must ban me
from Scotland.
Make me a public spectacle
so that all will hear of it.
You shouldn't have to do this.
You are a good
and fair queen, sister.
Your people need you.
My only regret is that I will
no longer be able to serve
at your side,
and protect you.
Only for a time.
I will call you back, James.
What am I going
to do without you?
JAMES:
Summon Lord Bothwell.
I know he would rather die
than see you harmed.
You can't rely
on Darnley for this,
it's too important.
MARY:
Tell me, Mrs. Knox,
When you told James that
the Hamiltons intended me harm,
did you know
it was a lie,
even as you spoke it?
It is no worse than
lies he has told me.
Why don't you kill me now?
You've destroyed
my life anyway.
I may still need you,
to connect your husband
to the slaughter.
His followers believe
he is God's messenger.
Anything you do to him
will only make him a martyr.
You have cost me much, Emily.
But something tells me
there is some truth
in your lies
about the way you live, hmm?
Go home
to the powerful man
who knows
that you betrayed him.
Enjoy the living hell
that is your marriage.
That is your punishment.
NARCISSE:
Your Majesty.
It has just been
confirmed--
the attack on the rebels
has been executed.
And the hostages?
Thanks to your quick action,
they are saved.
But at what cost?
How many gallant soldiers
did I send to their deaths?
Charles, come
with me, please.
There's something
you need to see.
You helped Charles
find the strength
to do the right thing.
You saved lives today.
I did it for you.
(people cheering)
WOMAN:
Charles, the savior of France!
It's all right,
you are their hero.
They're calling me
their savior.
They love you.
(cheers and applause)
Is that...
My son.
What's his name?
Charles.
Named after the king
who saved his life.
I wish Leeza were here
to see this.
NARCISSE:
Charles, a Catholic king
embraced by his people.
Oh, I'll make sure
she knows.
And perhaps this turn
of events
will get her to stop
interfering in French affairs,
and let us live
in peace.
I wouldn't go that far.
She is your daughter,
after all.
Perhaps this will
buy us some room.
Yes, giving us time to
secure Charles' reign.
If we can keep
his hand steady,
he won't need
to abdicate.
Henri might not be
too happy about that.
We can't have him
contesting the throne.
Not when his brother is
finally embracing being king.
And as long as Nicole thinks
she has your love,
We can use her
to control Charles.
For the good
of France, of course.
For the good of France.
Lord James Stuart,
Earl of Moray,
for your egregious crimes,
you are hereby banished
from Scotland.
Furthermore, your lands
and titles are forfeits
to the Crown, your wealth
stripped from your person
as you leave in disgrace.
Wait.
(horse neighs)
How many more people
will you sacrifice?
Was there no other way?
Don't go.
I have work.
Or should I tell
the privy council
that the queen's needs
are more pressing?
Fine. You're released.
(chuckles)
Shall I write
to the archduke
to officially initiate
courtship proceedings?
It's all right.
For England's sake,
you still need a husband.
I understand that.
But I don't want
to lose you.
You won't.
I've traveled this path before.
It won't be easy
standing on the sidelines,
seeing me
with someone else.
You will want
a love of your own.
It's very complicated.
I'm not Dudley.
I expect no more
than what we enjoy now.
It will not be
enough for you.
It is.
If our love
must be secret,
and our child, so long
that it is loved,
never know its father,
then... so be it.
At least I'll be
a part of your life.
The most precious part.
(swords clanging)
(grunting)
(Catherine laughs)
You're getting good
at this.
Well, I'll have to be
a great swordsman
if I want to lead France
to victory on the battlefield.
And you're no longer afraid
of that responsibility?
Not anymore.
I understand that
sometimes a king
must wield a sword
to protect his people.
And your people will
honor you for it,
as they did today.
They loved me.
I can still hear the crowd
chanting my name.
I want it, Mother.
To be king.
I am so proud of you.
(whispering)
Mother.
Looking lovely, as always.
Not exactly the
welcome reception
I was hoping for.
Henri, you must not have
received my letter.
There's been a change
of plan.
Oh.
Leeza said Charles
is unwell,
and I was needed
immediately.
Well, I had hoped
to save you the journey.
Your brother
is quite recovered.
So he's not going
to be abdicating?
No.
Good.
That's a relief.
You're not disappointed?
Charles is my brother,
and the lawful
king of France.
And I'm a prince
who gets to do
whatever he wants.
(sighs)
Welcome home, my son.
(chuckles)
I think we should
keep my coronation
a small, private affair.
This does not feel
like the time
for pomp or pageantry.
I know how much
you were looking forward to it.
I appreciate your understanding
and sacrifice.
Sometimes a ruler must
do things they hate
for the sake of the Crown.
I know his death is
a terrible complication,
but so you know,
I refused to let
Lord Hamilton provoke me.
Though I was tempted,
I found strength
in your challenge
to be a better man.
That is what
I hope to be.
I can take care
of you, Mary,
and I can protect you,
if you will only allow me.
I will consider it.
Might you also consider,
at last,
starting a family with me?
Actually...
...we have already started.
I am pregnant
with your child.
I will be a good father
and a good husband.
On that you have my oath.
♪ ♪
(applause)
MAN:
All hail the king!
(applause continues)
Captioning sponsored by
CBS PRODUCTIONS
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
access.wgbh.org
GIRL:
Oh, no.